examples/rhai/README.md, before:

# Rhai Middleware Examples

This directory contains example Rhai scripts for transforming events using the UDF middleware.

## Running the Examples

To use these scripts with the middleware:

```rust
use mstream::middleware::udf::rhai::RhaiMiddleware;

let middleware = RhaiMiddleware::new(
    "examples/rhai/scripts".to_string(),
    "json_transform.rhai".to_string()
)?;
```

## TOML Configuration Example

Here's a complete TOML configuration example showing how to use these Rhai scripts in a connector:

```toml
[[services]]
provider = "udf"
name = "udf-rhai"
engine = { kind = "rhai" }
script_path = "examples/rhai/scripts/"

[[connectors]]
enabled = true
name = "user-data-transform"

# Define source - MongoDB collection
source = { service_name = "mongodb-local", resource = "users", output_encoding = "json" }

# Use Rhai scripts as middleware transformations
middlewares = [
    # First apply loyalty tier calculation
    { service_name = "udf-rhai", resource = "json_transform.rhai", output_encoding = "json" },

    # Then enrich with metadata attributes
    { service_name = "udf-rhai", resource = "attribute_enrichment.rhai", output_encoding = "json" },
]

# Define multiple sinks for the transformed data
sinks = [
    # Send to MongoDB
    { service_name = "mongodb-local", resource = "users_processed", output_encoding = "bson" },

    # Also send to Kafka
    { service_name = "kafka-local", resource = "users_topic", output_encoding = "json" }
]
```

## Available Scripts

### json_transform.rhai
Transforms JSON events by adding fields, calculating derived values, and cleaning data.

### attribute_enrichment.rhai
Enriches event attributes with processing metadata and derived information.

### data_filter.rhai
Filters and reshapes data based on business rules.

## Sample Data

The `sample_data/` directory contains example JSON events that can be processed by these scripts.

Commit message:

Optimizations (#72)
* Mongo optimizations

* Bson, rhai, mongo zero-cost allocation optimisations

* test(rhai): restore resource limit tests and fix doctests

* refactor(rhai): remove unused JsonConverter, RhaiString and SourceBatch

* Test fixes

* Update docs, examples and docker setup

* Add mongo-keyfile to gitignore

* Update rhai examples readme

* Update comment in Makefile

* Fix typo in the integration tests

* Remove PRIMARY_HOST from Makefile

* Add docblocks to framed.rs and minor overflow checks

examples/rhai/README.md, after:

# Rhai Middleware Examples

This directory contains example Rhai scripts for transforming events using the UDF middleware.

## TOML Configuration Example

Here's a complete TOML configuration example showing how to use these Rhai scripts in a connector:

```toml
[[services]]
provider = "udf"
name = "udf-rhai"
engine = { kind = "rhai" }
script_path = "examples/rhai/scripts/"

[[connectors]]
enabled = true
name = "user-data-transform"

# Define source - MongoDB collection
source = { service_name = "mongodb-local", resource = "users", output_encoding = "json" }

# Use Rhai scripts as middleware transformations
middlewares = [
    # First apply loyalty tier calculation
    { service_name = "udf-rhai", resource = "json_transform.rhai", output_encoding = "json" },

    # Then enrich with metadata attributes
    { service_name = "udf-rhai", resource = "attribute_enrichment.rhai", output_encoding = "json" },
]

# Define multiple sinks for the transformed data
sinks = [
    # Send to MongoDB
    { service_name = "mongodb-local", resource = "users_processed", output_encoding = "bson" },

    # Also send to Kafka
    { service_name = "kafka-local", resource = "users_topic", output_encoding = "json" }
]
```

## Available Scripts

* [json_transform.rhai](./scripts/json_transform.rhai)
Transforms JSON events by adding fields, calculating derived values, and cleaning data.

* [attribute_enrichment.rhai](./scripts/attribute_enrichment.rhai)
Enriches event attributes with processing metadata and derived information.

* [data_filter.rhai](./scripts/data_filter.rhai)
Filters and reshapes data based on business rules.

## Sample Data

The `sample_data/` directory contains example JSON events that can be processed by these scripts.

## Writing Rhai Scripts

The `transform` function receives the event data automatically decoded based on the source encoding (e.g., as a Map for JSON/BSON). It should return the transformed data, which will be encoded back to the output format.

## Built-in Rhai Helper Functions

The embedded Rhai engine exposes several helper functions you can call from your scripts:

- `result(data, attributes?)`: wraps the transformed payload (and optional updated attributes) for the pipeline.
- `timestamp_ms()`: returns the current UNIX timestamp in milliseconds.
- `hash_sha256(value)`: computes a SHA-256 hex digest for anonymization.
- `mask_email(email)`: obfuscates the local-part of an email (e.g., `alice@example.com` → `a***@example.com`).
- `mask_phone(phone)`: masks all but the last four digits of a phone number.
- `mask_year_only(date_or_iso_date)`: truncates a date to the first day of its year, handling both plain strings and MongoDB EJSON timestamps.

Use these helpers to keep your Rhai scripts concise and consistent across connectors.
